                         Turing Machines

     A Turing machine consists of the following components:

     1) An infinite length tape (both to the left and to the 
        right) divided into squares.  Each square can hold one
        symbol.

     2) A finite automaton (FA) with a single start state and
        zero or more accept states.

     3) A read/write head that can read from and write to the 
        square on the tape to which the read/write head is 
        pointing.

     4) A set of quintuples.  These quintuples specify the
        actions the Turing machine should take.  It is analogous
        to a machine language program in a computer.




                        tape
     <---------------------------------------------------------->
      |   |   |   |   | a | a | b | b |   |   |   |   |   |   |
     <---------------------------------------------------------->
                        ^  read/write head
                        |
                 +-----------------------+     
                 | 1 (the current state) | FA
                 +-----------------------+


Depending on the current state of the FA and the current input 
(i.e., the symbol under the read/write head), the Turing machine 
takes some action.  An action consists of 

     1) Write a new symbol (not necessarily different than the
        current input) to the tape at the current location of
        the read/write head.

     2) move the read/write head left or right one square or stay
        at the current location on the tape

     3) Change the state of the FA to some new state (which can 
        be the same as the current state).

The quintuples of a Turing machine define these actions.  Each 
quintuple consists of the following five components:

     CURRENTSTATE CURRENTINPUT NEWSTATE NEWSYMBOL MOVE

The last three components (NEWSTATE NEWSYMBOL MOVE) specify the 
action.  The first two components specify the condition under 
which the action should be performed.  A move is l (left), r 
(right), or s (stay).  Consider the quintuple  

     1 a 2 b r
                                      
Because the first two components of this quintuple are 1 a, the 
action specified by this quintuple (2 b r) should be taken only 
if the Turing machine is in state 1 and the current input is 
'a'.  This is the case with the Turing machine illustrated above.  
Thus, this quintuple causes the Turing machine above to go into 
state 2, write a 'b', and move right.  The new configuration 
looks like this: 

 

                                  tape
     <---------------------------------------------------------->
      |   |   |   |   | b | a | b | b |   |   |   |   |   |   |
     <---------------------------------------------------------->
                            ^  read/write head
                            |
                   +-----------------------+     
                   | 2 (the current state) |FA
                   +-----------------------+



     A Turing machine halts if there is no quintuple applicable to 
its current state and current input.  

     A Turing machines can function as a language recognizer.  
That is, it can accept or reject strings depending on whether or 
not they are in a particular language.  A Turing machine accepts 
a string by halting in an accept state.  A Turing machine rejects 
a string by either halting in a reject state or by never halting.  
The language defined by a Turing machine is the set of strings it 
can accept.

     We call a language that can be recognized by a Turing 
machine TURING RECOGNIZABLE or RECURSIVELY ENUMERABLE.  We call a 
language that can be recognized by a Turing machine that halts 
for all inputs TURING DECIDABLE or RECURSIVE. 

     Turing machines can also compute mathematical functions.  We 
typically represent whole numbers on a tape in "unary" form.  In 
unary, the number n is represented with n consecutive 1's.  
Suppose, for example, we have a Turing machine that when started 
on a tape with n 1's (which represents the number n) will 
eventually halt leaving n+1 1's (which represents the number n+1) 
on the tape.  Such a Turing machine computes the function f(n) = 
n + 1. 

     At this point, you should study the documentation on the 
Turing machine simulator (it is in t.txt).  After you understand 
the examples in t.txt, do the following problem:

     Create a Turing machine that defines the language consisting of 
     all strings over the alphabet {a, b} in which the number of 
     a's is equal to the number of b's.  Run your Turing machine 
     on the simulator.  Use the tape file qeq.tt to test your Turing 
     machine.  Use the file name qeq.t for your quintuple file.

A Turing machine is non-deterministic if more than one quintuple 
exists with the same initial two components.  For example, if a 
Turing machine contains both of these quintuples

     1 a 1 b r
     1 a 3 x l

then the Turing machine is non-deterministic.  When the current 
state is 1 and the current input is 'a', either quintuple can be 
applied.   
   
     Turing machines have three particularly interesting 
properties: 

     1) They have the same power as a general-purpose computer. 
        Whatever computation a computer can perform, so can a 
        Turing machine, and vice versa. 

     2) There is no known automaton that is more powerful than a 
        Turing machine.  Moreover, it is widely believed that a 
        more powerful automaton does not exist (this assertion is 
        called Church's thesis, after its originator, Alonzo 
        Church). 

     3) Turing machines have precisely the same power to define
        languages as unrestricted grammars.


Because of property 1, the following assertions are all equivalent:

     There exists a Turing machine that always halts that will ....

     There exists a computer program that always halts that will ...

     There exists an algorithm that will ...

     There exists an effective procedure that will ...


Now let's consider property 3.  Suppose we have an unrestricted 
grammar one of whose productions is

     BC -> D

This production replaces BC with D.  We can easily simulate this 
action on a Turing machine:  

     If two consecutive squares contains BC, a Turing machine can 
     easily change the B to a D and then move everything to the 
     right one square to the left. The effect is to replace BC 
     with D, just like the production.  

Conversely, any tape modification that a Turing machine can perform 
can be achieved with a production in an unrestricted grammar. 
Using these ideas, it is possible to prove that any language 
defined by a Turing machine can be defined by an unrestricted 
grammar, and vice versa.


Busy Beaver Function
--------------------

     Any symbol can be encoded using a sequence of 0's and 1's.  
Thus, without loss of generality, we can restrict our attention 
to Turing machines whose tape alphabet is {blank, 0, 1}. 
How many one-state Turing machines exist with this tape alphabet?
Consider the components of a quintuple:

          1            3           1        3       3
     CURRENTSTATE CURRENTINPUT NEWSTATE NEWSYMBOL MOVE

Above each component is the number of possibilities for that 
component.  Thus, there are 1 x 3 x 1 x 3 x 3 = 27 distinct 
quintuples.  Any subset of these 27 quintuples is a 1-state Turing 
machine.  Thus, there are 2 to the 27 distinct one-state 
Turing machines.  What is important here is not the specific 
number but that the number is FINITE.  Using the same analysis, 
we can see that the number of n-state Turing machines whose tape 
alphabet is {blank, 0, 1} must be FINITE.
     Now let's define the Busy Beaver function BB(n) where n >= 1.
Here is how to determine the value of BB(n).  Take all n-state 
Turing machines with tape alphabet {blank, 0, 1}.  Throw away all 
that do not halt when started on a tape that initially has n 1's.
Run all the rest on a tape that initially has n 1's.  After the 
Turing machines halt, examine the tapes.  Determine the tape with 
the maximum number of 1's.  The number of 1's of that tape is 
BB(n).     
     Suppose a Turing machine T computes BB(n).  Modify it so it 
computes BB(n)+1.  This modification is easy:  Add quintuples 
that move right until the first blank, write a 1 there, and halt. 
Let's call the modified Turing machine T'.  T' has some number of 
states.  Let's designate this number with k.  Now apply T' to a 
tape with k 1's initially.  From its construction, T' leaves 
BB(k)+1 1's on the tape.  But BB(k) is the maximum number on 1's 
that can be left on a tape by any k-state Turing machine, 
including T'.  Thus, we have a contradiction.  The only way to 
resolve this contradiction is to conclude that our initial 
assumption--that the Turing machine T exists that computes BB(n)--is 
false.  BB(n) is a NON-COMPUTABLE FUNCTION. 

    

A Sketch of the Unsolvability of the Halting Problem
----------------------------------------------------

Halting Problem: Does a Turing Machine H exist which can determine
if an arbitrary Turing Machine M halts when applied to an arbitrary
initial tape containing w.  

Let R(M) represent the encoding of the start state, accept 
states, and quintuples that represent the Turing Machine M.  A 
Turing machine H which solves the halting problem would behave as 
follows:  

     When H is applied to a tape containing both R(M) and w, H 
     would always halt.  It would halt in an accept state if M 
     halts on w and would halt in a reject state if M never halts 
     on w. 

Assume Turing Machine H exists.  Construct Turing Machine H' from
H that behaves as follows:

When H' is applied to a tape containing  R(M) w

     H' loops if M halts on a tape initially containing w.
     H' halts if M loops on a tape initially containing w.

Notice that H', when applied to R(M) w, does the opposite of what M 
does when M is applied to w. 
    
Now modify H' to get H".  H" is the same as H' except that it 
first duplicates whatever is on the input tape.  After the 
duplication has been completed, then H" behaves exactly like H'. 

Now let's see what happens when we apply H" to an initial tape
containing R(M). It first duplicates R(M).  So the tape has

       R(M) R(M)

Then it behaves exactly like H'--that is, it does the opposite of 
Turing Machine M when M is applied to its own description.  That 
is, if M halts on its own description, R(M), then H" loops; if M 
loops on it own description then H" halts eventually. 

Now what happens when H" is applied to R(H")?  IT DOES THE 
OPPOSITE OF WHAT IT DOES (this is the conclusion of the preceding 
paragraph; try rereading carefully).  Obviously, this is a 
logical impossibility.  Thus, it must be that our initial 
assumption--that a Turing machine H exists that solves the 
halting problem--is false.  The halting problem is an unsolvable 
problem. 


Reducibility
------------

Here is a variation of the halting problem:  

Blank Tape Halting Problem: Does a Turing Machine B exist which 
can determine if an arbitrary Turing Machine M halts when applied 
to a blank tape.  Given a tape with R(M) (the encoding of a 
Turing machine M), Turing machine B would always halt.  It would 
halt in the accept state if M halts when started on a blank 
tape.  It would halt on a reject state if M does not halt when 
started on a blank tape.

Suppose the blank tape halting problem were solvable--that is, 
suppose the Turing machine B exists.  It can be shown that we 
could then use B to solve the halting problem.  Thus, if B 
exists, the halting problem would be solvable.  But, as we saw 
above, the halting problem is not solvable.  Thus, it is 
impossible for B to exist.  In other words, the blank tape 
halting problem is also unsolvable.  

Definition:

Given two problems, A and B, if a solution to B implies there is 
a solution to A, we say 

     A is reducible to B.

For example, a solution to the blank tape halting problem implies 
there is a solution to the halting problem.  Thus, the halting 
problem is reducible to the blank tape halting problem.

If A is reducible to B, and A is unsolvable, then B must be 
unsolvable as well (because, otherwise, A would be solvable).  If 
we then show that B is reducible to C, then C must be unsolvable.  
If we then show that C is reducible to D, then D must be 
unsolvable.  And so on.  Given a sequence of problems that 
starts with an unsolvable problem, and in which each problem 
reduces to the next, then the entire sequence of problems is 
unsolvable.

Unsolvable problems are often presented as language membership 
problems.  For example, consider the following language:

     {R(M) w : M is a Turing machine and M halts when started on w}

This language is decidable if and only if the halting problem is 
solvable.


Recursive and Recursively Enumerable Languages
----------------------------------------------

Defintion: 

A RECURSIVE LANGUAGE is a language that can be defined by a 
Turing machine that always halts. We also call such a language 
a Turing-decidable language. 

Definition: 

A RECURSIVELY ENUMERABLE language is a language that can be 
defined by a Turing machine.  We also call such a language a Turing-
recognizable language.  For a recursively enumerable language, 
we do not require that the defining Turing machine always halts. 

The preceding definitions imply that the recursive languages are 
a subclass of the recursively enumerable languages.  That is, 
every recursive language is also recursively enumerable.  
However, it turns out that not every recursively enumerable 
language is recursive.  In fact, there are languages that are not 
even recursively enumerable.  The NRE language defined below is 
an example a language which is not recursively enumerable.  It's 
curious that WE can define NRE below but no Turing machine can define it.


NRE--a language which is not recursively enumerable

We can order Turing machines whose alphabet is {blank, 0, 1}. 
First list the 1-state Turing machines, then the 2-state Turing 
machines, and so on.  Thus, we can talk about T1 (the first 
Turing machine on the list), T2 (the second), and so on.  Given 
any Turing machine T with alphabet {blank, 0, 1}, there exists a 
positive integer i such that T is equal to Ti.  Consider the 
language NRE = {i : Ti rejects i}.  This language cannot be 
defined by T1 because if T1 accepts 1 then 1 is not in the 
language.  But if T1 rejects 1 then 1 is in the language. 
Similarly, this language cannot be defined by T2.  If T2 accepts 
2 then 2 is not is the language, but if T2 rejects 2, then 2 is 
in the language.  Using the same argument, we can conclude that 
this language is not defined by T3, T4, T5, and so on. NO TURING 
MACHINE DEFINES THIS LANGUAGE. This language is not recusively 
enumerable.  

A recursively enumerable language has the property that it can be 
enumerated--that is, listed out (i.e., written out on the tape) 
by some Turing machine.  Conversely, if a language can be 
enumerated by some Turing machine, then it is recursively 
enumerable (i.e., it can be defined by some Turing machine). 


P and NP
--------

P is a set of languages.  A language L is in P if 

   - there exists a deterministic Turing machine M that decides 
     L.  That is, there exists a Turing machine M that 
     always halts that accepts all strings in L and rejects all 
     others, and 

   - the maximum number of steps M takes for an input of length
     n is some polynomial function of n.  We call this function
     the time complexity of the Turing machine.

The number of steps a Turing machine takes before it halts is a 
measure of how much time it takes.  Thus, we can view P as the 
set of languages that can be decided in polynomial time.

NP is a set of languages.  A language L is in NP if

   - there exists a non-deterministic Turing machine M that 
     decides L.  That is, there exists a Turing machine M that 
     always halts that can accept all strings in L and only 
     strings in L, and 

   - the maximum number of steps M takes for an input of length
     n is some polynomial function of n.

Because a non-deterministic Turing machine is allowed to have 
choices in its operation, it is possible that the outcome might 
depend on the choices it makes.  For example, on a string w, a 
Turing machine might reject if it makes one set of choices.  But 
it might accept the same string if it makes a different set of 
choices.  The string w is in the language defined the Turing 
machine as long as it is possible for the Turing machine to 
accept (by making the right choices).  If, on the other hand , no 
matter what choices the Turing machine makes, it cannot accept w, 
then w is not in the language defined by the Turing machine. 

A deterministic Turing machine is a special case of a non-
deterministic Turing machine.  Thus, P is a subset of N.  But 
is P a proper subset of N or does P equal N?  The question, 
"does P equal NP" is a famous open question.

There are some languages in NP that have a remarkable property. 
If there exists a deterministic Turing machine that decides any 
of them in polynomial time, then for EVERY language in NP, there 
exists a deterministic decider that operates in polynomial time.  
In other words, if any of these special languages are in P, then 
the entire set NP is necessarily in P, in which case P = NP.  We 
call the languages in NP that have this property NP-COMPLETE 
LANGUAGES. Thus, to show that P = NP, all we have to do is show 
that any one of the NP complete languages is in P.


Primitive Recursive Functions  
-----------------------------

We can define addition on the non-negative integers using 
recursion.  Here's the definition:

     add(x, y) = x                   for y = 0
     add(x, y) = add(x, y - 1) + 1   for y > 0

Using this definition, we get

     add(5, 0) = 5  
     add(5, 1) = add(5, 0) + 1 = 5 + 1 = 6
     add(5, 2) = add(5, 1) + 1 = 6 + 1 = 7
     add(5, 3) = add(5, 2) + 1 = 7 + 1 = 8

and so on.

Each value of the function is obtained from the value of the 
function for the predecessor value of y.  For example, add(5, 2) 
is obtained by getting the value of add(5, 1) and adding 1.  
Similarly, add(5, 3) is obtained by getting the value of 
add(5, 2) and adding 1.

Define the successor function S(x) on the non-negative integers 
as follows:

     S(0) = 1, S(1) = 2, S(2) = 3, as so on

The successor function yields a value one more than the value it is 
provided.

Using the successor function, we can define the additon function 
as follows: 

     add(x, 0)    =  x
     add(x, S(y)) =  S(add(x, y))

This is essentially the same definition of add as the preceding 
one: the value of the function in defined in terms of the value 
of the function for the predecessor value of y.  

Let's now define multiplication:

     mult(x, 0)    = 0
     mult(x, S(y)) = add(mult(x, y), x))

Using this definition, to determine mult(5, 2), we first get the 
value of mult(5, 1) and then add 5.  Thus, 

     mult(5, 2) = add(mult(5, 1), 5) = add(5,5) = 10

Function defined in this way are called PRIMITIVE RECURSIVE 
FUNCTIONS.  

Now let's define exponentiation, using our mult function and 
primitive recursion:

     exp(x, 0)    = 1
     exp(x, S(y)) = mult(exp(x, y), x)

All primitive recursive functions are Turing computable, but are 
all Turing computable functions primitive recursive?  The answer 
is no. For example, Ackermann's function is Turing computable but 
not primitive recursive: 

     A(x, y) = y + 1                  for x = 0
     A(x, y) = A(x - 1, 1)            for x > 0 and y = 0
     A(x, y) = A(x - 1, A(x, y - 1))  for x > 0 and y > 0

 


Problems 
--------

Define the following sets with a deterministic Turing machine.
Use the quintuple file name that matches the tape file name, but 
has the extension ".t".  For example, for problem 3, the tape 
file is q3.tt.  Thus, the quintuple file should be q3.t.


3) {b^n ; n is even}.  b^n is b to the n--that is, n b's. Test on 
   simulator with tape file q3.tt. 

4) {a^nb^nc^n : n >= 0}.  Test on simulator with tape file q4.tt.

5) {wcw: w is a string over the alphabet {a,b}. Test on simulator 
   with tape file q5.tt.                          

6) {wcw^r : w is a string over the alphabet {a, b}.  w^r is w 
   reversed. Test on simulator with tape file q6.tt.

7) X = the set of all strings over {b} with length a power of 2.
   X = {b, bb, bbbb, bbbbbbbb, bbbbbbbbbbbbbbbb, ...}
   Test on simulator with tape file q7.tt.

Create Turing machines that compute the following functions:

8) f(n) = 2n, n >= 1.  Test on simulator with tape file q8.tt.  

9) f(x, y) = x - y where x >= y >= 1.  The tape initially should 
   contain x and y, separated by the symbol #. Test on simulator 
   with tape file q9.tt.

10) f(n) = n mod 3, n >= 1.  Test on simulator with tape file 
    q10.tt.

11) f(n) = n x n, n >= 1.  Test on simulator with tape file 
    q11.tt.


Answer the following questions:

12) Is a finite language always recursive?  Justify your answer.

13) If a language is recursive, is its complement necessarily 
    recursive?  Justify your answer. 

14) If a language and its complement are both recursively 
    enumerable, are they also recursive?  Justify your answer. 

15) We defined the language NRE above that is not recursively 
    enumerable. What can you say about the complement of NRE? 

16) Give examples of languages that are recursive, recursively 
    enumerable, but not recursive, and not even recursively 
    enumerable. 

17) Show that for every recursively enumerable language, there 
    exists a Turing machine that will enumerate it. 

18) Show that any language that can be enumerated by some Turing 
    machine is recursively enumerable (i.e., can be defined by 
    some Turng machine). 

19) Show that the blank tape halting problem is unsolvable.

20) Show that the following problem is unsolvable: Is the 
    language defined by a Turing machine M empty? 

21) Show that the following problem is unsolvable: Is the 
    language defined by a Turing machine M is regular? 

22) Show that the following problem is unsolvable: Are the 
    languages defined by Turing machines M and N equal? 

23) Show that non-deterministic Turing machines are no more 
    powerful than deterministic Turing machines.  

24) Using primitive recursion, define the predecessor function, 
    which returns one less than the value it is given, except for 
    zero, in which case it returns zero. 

25) Using primitive recursion, define the floor subtraction 
    function, which yields x - y if x >= y but yields 0 if y > x.

26) Determine the following values for Ackermann's function:

         A(0, 0)
         A(1, 1)
         A(2, 2)
         A(3, 3)
    
27) Why does it make sense to use the successor function rather 
    than subtraction by 1 in primitive recursive definitions?
